\n--- PAGE 1 ---\nThe UK Standard for 
Professional Engineering 
Competence and 
Commitment  
(UK-SPEC)
Fourth edition
Published August 2020\n\n--- PAGE 2 ---\n2
Hierarchy of regulations and standards
The Engineering Council is the UK’s regulatory body for the 
engineering profession. It operates under a Royal Charter and 
is governed by a Board that represents UK Licensees as well 
as individuals from industries and sectors with an interest in the 
regulation of the profession.  
This document is one in a series of closely related publications:
 •Regulations for Registration (RfR)
 •Regulations for Licensing (RfL)
 •The UK Standard for Professional Engineering 
Competence and Commitment (UK-SPEC)
 •Information and Communications Technology Technician 
Standard (ICT Tech  Standard)
 •Approval and Accreditation of Qualifications and 
Apprenticeships (AAQA)
 •Accreditation of Higher Education Programmes (AHEP)
The Engineering Council publishes these documents on behalf of 
the UK engineering profession, with whom they were developed 
and are kept under review. The relationship between these 
publications is:\n\n--- PAGE 3 ---\n3
The Engineering Council also publishes policy statements, guidance for institutions and guidance for individuals.  
These, along with all the publications listed above, are available on the Engineering Council website : www.engc.org.ukRoyal Charter
UK-SPEC and the ICT Tech  Standard are 
reference Standards that, with reference 
to RfR, set out the competence and 
commitment required for registration as 
CEng, IEng, EngTech and ICT Tech .
AAQA and AHEP are reference Standards that, with 
reference to RfR, set out the policy, context, rules and 
procedures for recognising learning and development 
programmes that help develop the competence and 
commitment set out in UK-SPEC and ICT Tech Standard.The Royal Charter is an instrument of incorporation 
granted by the UK monarch. It confers independent  
legal personality on the Engineering Council and  
defines its objectives, constitution and powers to  
govern its own affairs.
The Bye-laws are the rules by which the 
Engineering Council regulates itself.
The regulations (including RfR and RfL) set out the 
rules Licensees must adhere to when carrying out 
processes regulated by the Engineering Council. Bye-laws
Regulations
UK-SPECICTTech 
StandardAAQA AHEP
Recognised 
StandardsRecognised Standards are derived from 
UK-SPEC by the Engineering Council, 
Licensees, or a third party. 
www.engc.org.uk/recognisedstandards\n\n--- PAGE 4 ---\n4
Foreword
Engineers and technicians respond to the needs of both society 
and business, solving complex challenges. Engineers and 
technicians work in the art and practice of changing our world,  
enhancing welfare, health and safety while paying due regard to 
the environment. 
Society places great faith in the engineering profession, trusting its 
members to regulate themselves. By achieving and demonstrating 
professional competence and commitment for the purpose of 
registration, engineers and technicians demonstrate that they are 
worthy of that trust.
This document forms part of the Standard used by the UK 
engineering profession to assess the competence and commitment 
of individual engineers and technicians. It was developed 
collaboratively in consultation with engineers representing the 
breadth of the profession, from industry, academia and many 
different disciplines and specialisms. Contents
Foreword        4
Welcome        5
What is professional registration?     6
How to become professionally registered    10
The Engineering Technician (EngTech) Standard   19
The Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Standard    24
The Chartered Engineer (CEng) Standard    31
Comparison table for EngTech, IEng and CEng Standards 40
Continuing Professional Development     46
Professional and Ethical Behaviour     47
Glossary        49\n\n--- PAGE 5 ---\n5
Welcome
 •Employers of engineers and technicians
 •People responsible for engineers’ education or training
Key information
Throughout this document some key information, terms and 
crucial points will be picked out in boxed text like this to help 
navigation. The purpose of UK-SPEC
This document is the UK Standard for Professional Engineering 
Competence and Commitment (UK-SPEC).  
The primary purpose of UK-SPEC is to explain the competence 
and commitment requirements that people must meet and 
demonstrate to be registered in each of these registration 
categories:
 •Engineering Technician (EngTech)
 •Incorporated Engineer (IEng)
 •Chartered Engineer (CEng) 
This document also explains:
 •Why professional registration is important
 •How to achieve professional registration
 •What engineers and technicians must do to maintain 
professional registration, including:
 the requirement to maintain and enhance competence
 the obligation to act with integrity and in the public interest
 membership of a Licensee
Who UK-SPEC is for 
Many different users will find this document useful. However, it has 
been written pr imarily for these audiences:
 •Individuals who are thinking about becoming professionally 
registered
 •Licensees and Professional Affiliates through which engineers 
and technicians become registered Licensee
Throughout this document the term ‘Licensee’ is used to 
describe the engineering institutions that have been licensed 
by the Engineering Council board to assess individuals for 
professional registration. To become Licensees organisations 
must pass a rigorous process demonstrating, to the satisfaction 
of the Engineering Council Board, that they are competent to 
perform this task and to regulate the conduct of their members. 
Additionally, Licensees can also be licensed to approve 
or accredit programmes of learning to specific standards. 
Licensees are sometimes known informally as Professional 
Engineering Institutions, or PEIs.
Glossary
At the end of UK-SPEC there is a glossary that explains some of 
terms we use. \n\n--- PAGE 6 ---\n6
What is professional registration?
Professional registration verifies that an individual can meet 
the engineering and technological needs of today, while also 
anticipating the needs of, and impact on, future generations.  
Both in the UK and overseas, professional registration gives 
employers, government and society confidence in the engineering 
industry. In this way, professional registration offers safeguarding 
assurances. 
Registration demonstrates that an engineer or technician has 
reached a set standard of knowledge, understanding and 
occupational competence. It also demonstrates an individual’s 
commitment to professional standards and to developing and 
enhancing through Continuing Professional Development (CPD). 
People who gain further qualifications or experience over the 
course of their careers can be assessed for another registration 
title. Many people continue to develop their competence to enable 
them to move from EngTech to IEng or CEng, or from IEng to 
CEng.  UK-SPEC covers three professional registration categories 
which are set out in Table 1 on page 7.Why register?
Benefits for individuals: recognition, career development, 
earning potential
Professional registration sets individual engineers and technicians 
apart from those who are not registered. Gaining a professional 
title establishes a person’s proven knowledge, understanding and 
competence to a set standard and demonstrates their commitment 
to developing and enhancing competence. 
Registration increases a person’s earning potential and 
establishes credibility with peers across the profession. The 
professional qualifications of EngTech, IEng and CEng are 
internationally recognised. 
Maintaining registration requires continued membership of a 
Licensee. Licensees, in turn, can help registrants find development 
opportunities through exposure to new developments, training or 
networking opportunities. 
In addition, the criteria of the UK-SPEC provide a useful framework 
for CPD, particularly for engineers and technicians aiming for a 
professional registration title. Achievement of registration can 
demonstrate a person’s readiness for promotion or help them 
secure new roles or contracts. 
Further benefits for individuals are available at:  
www.engc.org.uk/benefits\n\n--- PAGE 7 ---\n7
Table 1: Overview of professional registration titles 
Title Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
Descriptor Applies proven techniques and 
procedures to solve practical 
engineering problems. Applies safe 
systems of work.Maintains and manages applications 
of current and developing technology, 
and may undertake engineering design, 
development, manufacture, construction 
and operation.Develops solutions to engineering 
problems using new or existing 
technologies, through innovation, 
creativity and change. May be 
accountable for complex systems with 
significant levels of risk.
Key 
attributes:1. Contribution to either the 
design, development, manufacture, 
commissioning, decommissioning, 
operation or maintenance of products, 
equipment, processes or services 
2. Supervisory or technical responsibility
3. Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters
4. Commitment to professional 
engineering values1. The theoretical knowledge to solve 
problems in developed technologies 
using well proven analytical techniques 
2. Successful application of their 
knowledge to deliver engineering 
projects or services using established 
technologies and methods 
3. Contribution to project and financial 
planning and management together 
with some responsibility for leading and 
developing other professional staff
4. Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters
5. Commitment to professional 
engineering values1. The theoretical knowledge to solve 
problems in new technologies and 
develop new analytical techniques 
2. Successful application of the 
knowledge to deliver innovative 
products and services and/or  
take technical responsibility for complex 
engineering systems 
3. Responsibility for financial and 
planning aspects of projects, sub-
projects or tasks
4. Leading and developing other 
professional staff through management, 
mentoring or coaching
5. Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters 
6. Commitment to professional 
engineering values\n\n--- PAGE 8 ---\n8
professionally registered engineers and technicians working in 
other countries. The professional titles EngTech, IEng and CEng 
are recognised widely around the world. Professional registration, 
as defined in UK-SPEC, reflects the requirements of global 
engineering. 
Engineers who have developed their professional engineering 
competence in countries outside of the United Kingdom are 
welcome to join the Engineering Council register, subject to 
meeting the assessment criteria.  
 
For further information see: www.engc.org.uk/international
What is engineering competence? 
Competence is defined as a professional’s ability to carry out 
engineering tasks successfully and safely within their field of 
practice. This includes having the individual skills, knowledge and 
understanding, personal behaviour and approach, to be able to 
work collaboratively with others to achieve the intended outcomes. 
Competence includes the ability to make professional judgments 
and an awareness of the limits of one’s own ability and knowledge 
in order to seek assistance when required.Benefits for employers: assurance of quality
Each registration title requires demonstrations of competence in 
five broad areas: 
A. Knowledge and understanding
B. Design, development and solving engineering problems
C. Responsibility, management and leadership
D. Communication and interpersonal skills
E. Professional commitment Employers of professionally registered engineers and technicians 
can be assured that registered engineers and technicians have:
 •had their competence and credentials independently assessed 
 •had their credentials verified to an internationally recognised 
standard, and 
 •made a commitment to their CPD. 
Employing registered professionals can help mitigate against 
risks and liabilities, as registrants are governed by a Code of 
Professional Conduct. 
Maintaining registration requires continued membership of a 
Licensee and a commitment to CPD. This means employers 
can be reassured that registered employees are developing 
and enhancing their competence and will be exposed to new 
developments in their profession. 
Some employers find the framework of the UK-SPEC a useful 
basis for their own organisational needs, such as to structure 
CPD. Others rely on achievement of registration to demonstrate an 
employee's readiness for promotion. In some cases, both in the UK 
and internationally, the awarding of contracts will require evidence 
that organisations employ professionally registered engineers.
Further benefits for employers are available at:  
www.engc.org.uk/employers
International context
The Engineering Council is committed to supporting its \n\n--- PAGE 9 ---\n9
What is professional commitment? 
Registered engineering professionals are required to demonstrate 
a personal and professional commitment to society, to the 
environment and to their profession. As part of demonstrating 
overall competence, it is mandatory to show that they have 
adopted a set of values and conduct that maintains and enhances 
the reputation of the profession. This includes:
 •Maintaining public and employee safety
 •Undertaking work in a way that protects the environment and 
contributes to sustainable development
 •Complying with codes of conduct, codes of practice and the 
legal and regulatory framework
 •Managing, applying and improving safe systems of work
 •Carrying out the CPD necessary to maintain and enhance 
competence in relation to duties and responsibilities
 •Exercising responsibilities in an ethical manner
 •Recognising inclusivity and diversity
 •Adopting a security-minded approach
 •Actively participating within the profession
The Engineering Council has published a CPD Code for Registrants, 
(see page 46), as well as guidance on risk, sustainability, 
whistleblowing and security (see  page 47).
Ethical standards
Together with the Royal Academy of Engineering, the Engineering 
Council developed The Statement of Ethical Principles. This 
document outlines how members of the profession should conduct 
themselves in their working habits and relationships. The values it is based on should apply in every situation in which engineers and 
technicians exercise their judgment. 
The Statement of Ethical Principles is available at:  
www.engc.org.uk/ethics
Further information on the required Standards is available from 
a variety of sources. Each Licensee will have its own Code of 
Professional Conduct, in line with the framework on Professional 
and Ethical Behaviour on page 47  of this document, and 
supporting guidance. \n\n--- PAGE 10 ---\n10
How to become professionally registered 
registration. These Professional Affiliate members may then apply 
for registration through the Licensee. 
The current list of Professional Affiliates, including those which 
have registration agreements, is available at:  
www.engc.org.uk/affiliates
How are applicants assessed? 
Pages  19–45 list the requirements for all three professional 
titles. Once a person is confident that they meet all the criteria for a 
professional title, they should make an application for assessment 
through their chosen Licensee. The assessment process is known 
as a Professional Review. The Licensee will provide a detailed 
description of the requirements and format for this. 
Applicants will need to submit formal documented evidence of any 
relevant qualifications, experience or training and show how this 
relates to the required competences and commitment set out in 
pages  19–45 of this document.
For EngTech qualifications, depending on the Licensee, there may 
be an interview, or it may simply be a one-stage process assessing 
an applicant’s submitted written evidence.
For CEng and IEng titles the Professional Review process has two 
stages: an assessment of written evidence and then an interview. 
In some engineering disciplines Licensees may specify additional 
methods of assessing competence and commitment.Professional registration is open to all engineers and technicians 
who: 
 •Can satisfy the requirements for underpinning knowledge and 
understanding
 •Can demonstrate competence and commitment to meet the 
necessary standard
 •Are members of a Licensee relevant to their discipline
What are the requirements for registration? 
The Engineering Council sets the Standards which need to be 
met for EngTech, IEng and CEng. P ages 19 –45 show the 
requirements for all three titles. However, it is the Licensee that 
will carry out an assessment of an applicant’s competence and 
commitment. The Licensee will act as the awarding body for 
professional registration as EngTech, IEng or CEng.  
Applicants need to apply for professional registration through a 
Licensee relevant to their discipline. The Licensee will be able 
to provide details about registration, including the process and 
typical timescales. 
 
The list of Licensees licensed by the Engineering Council is 
available at: www.engc.org.uk/licensees
A Professional Affiliate is an engineering institution which is 
closely associated with the Engineering Council but is not licensed 
to assess applicants or award registration. Some Professional 
Affiliates will have a registration agreement with a Licensee so that 
the Licensee can assess members of the Professional Affiliate for \n\n--- PAGE 11 ---\n11
Meeting the requirements for registration
Knowledge, understanding and skills form an essential part 
of competence. This provides the necessary foundation of 
underpinning logic and analytical capabilities. Knowledge, 
understanding and skills ensure that decisions are based on a full 
understanding of engineering practices and standards, rather than 
relying on instructions. 
Formal education is one way of demonstrating the necessary 
underpinning knowledge and understanding (see Recognised 
Qualifications, pages  13–15), but it is not the only way (see 
Individual Assessment, page 16 ). \n\n--- PAGE 12 ---\n12
Recognised qualifications
For applicants who have achieved the required learning 
outcomes through recognised qualifications. Qualifications 
which provide the required level of knowledge and 
understanding are:  
 •EngTech: Level 3 qualification as part of an approved 
apprenticeship scheme
 •IEng: an accredited Bachelors degree
 •CEng: an accredited integrated Masters degree or a 
combination of accredited Bachelors and Masters degreesProfessional Review of competence and 
commitment
Applicants are assessed against the UK-SPEC 
standard of competence which sets the minimum 
requirements. Licensees may add requirements which 
relate to their particular engineering discipline.
An expert panel, consisting of registered engineers 
from the Licensee, will review an applicant’s portfolio 
of evidence against the requirements. This is followed 
by:
Professional Review Interview (PRI)
All IEng and CEng applicants will be interviewed by a 
panel of registered engineers who are also members 
of the Licensee. EngTech applicants may need to 
attend a Professional Review Interview.  
The panel will then make a recommendation on 
whether the applicant meets the requirements for their 
chosen registration category.Individual assessment 
Applicants who do not have the recognised qualifications will 
instead have an individual assessment of their qualifications 
and any other relevant learning such as: 
 •formal academic programmes
 •in-employment training
 •experiential learning
 •self-directed learning 
Applicants may be also asked to write a technical report or 
attend a technical interview. 
The assessment will be carried out by registrants who are 
also members of the Licensee. The exact process is set out 
by the Licensee.Figure 1: Assessment process\n\n--- PAGE 13 ---\n13
Professional registration
The recommendation from the Professional Review is reviewed by the 
Licensee’s relevant committee. The applicant will achieve professional 
registration if:
 •The expert panel recommends that the applicant has met the 
requirements
 •All are satisfied that all stages of the process have been completed, 
and
 •The Licensee’s relevant committee endorses the recommendation.
The applicant then becomes a registrant and is able to use the relevant  
post-nominal. 
As a condition of continued registration, the individual commits to:
 •Maintain their competence through CPD and membership of their 
Licensee, and 
 •Adhere to their Licensee’s Code of Professional Conduct.
If an applicant has been unsuccessful the Licensee will provide some 
guidance on what further learning and/or competence development 
would be beneficial to achieve registration.
When all the above steps are completed to the satisfaction of the 
Licensee’s relevant committee, the applicant achieves professional 
registration. They commit to maintain their CPD and membership of 
their Licensee and to adhere to their Licensee’s Code of Professional 
Conduct. Figure 1 (continued)\n\n--- PAGE 14 ---\n14
Recognised qualifications 
The underpinning knowledge and understanding for each 
registration category can be developed from recognised 
qualifications that deliver the appropriate learning outcomes. 
The recognised qualifications for each registration category are set 
out in Table 2 . The learning outcomes are set out in detail in the 
Engineering Council publications Accreditation of Higher Education 
Programmes (AHEP) and the Approval and Accreditation of 
Qualifications and Apprenticeships (AAQA) Standards.  \n\n--- PAGE 15 ---\n15
Table 2: Recognised qualifications 
Engineering Technician (EngTech)  
One of the following:Incorporated Engineer (IEng)  
One of the following:Chartered Engineer (CEng)  
One of the following:
 •Successful completion of an apprenticeship 
or other work-based learning programme 
approved by a Licensee
 •Alongside appropriate working experience, 
holding a qualification, approved by a 
Licensee, in engineering or construction set 
at either:
 level 3 (or above) in the Regulated 
Qualifications Framework or National 
Qualifications Framework for England 
and Northern Ireland
 level 6 (or above) in the Scottish Credit 
and Qualifications Framework
 level 3 (or above) in the Credit and 
Qualifications Framework for Wales
 •Alongside appropriate working experience, 
holding equivalent qualifications or 
apprenticeships accredited or approved 
by a Licensee, or at an equivalent level 
in a relevant national or international 
qualifications framework† •An accredited Bachelors or honours 
degree in engineering or technology
 •An accredited Higher National Certificate 
(HNC) or Higher National Diploma (HND) 
in engineering or technology started before 
September 1999
 •An HNC or HND started after September 
1999 (but before September 2010 in 
the case of the HNC) or a Foundation 
Degree in engineering or technology, plus 
appropriate further learning to degree level
 •A National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) 
or Scottish Vocational Qualification (SVQ) 
at level 4 that has been approved by a 
Licensee, plus appropriate further learning 
to degree level *
 •Equivalent qualifications or 
apprenticeships accredited or approved 
by a Licensee, or at an equivalent level 
in a relevant national or international 
qualifications framework†  •An accredited Bachelors degree 
with honours in engineering 
or technology, plus either an 
appropriate Masters degree or 
engineering doctorate accredited by 
a Licensee, or appropriate further 
learning to Masters level *
 •An accredited integrated MEng 
degree
 •An accredited Bachelors degree 
with honours in engineering 
or technology started before 
September 1999
 •Equivalent qualifications or 
apprenticeships accredited 
or approved by a Licensee, 
or at an equivalent level in a 
relevant national or international 
qualifications framework† 
* See: www.engc.org.uk/ukspec4th  for qualification levels and HE reference points.
† For example, UNESCO’s International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) framework. 
The Engineering Council maintains a publicly accessible recognised course search database, which is available at:  
www.engc.org.uk/courses\n\n--- PAGE 16 ---\n16
Preparing for registration
Pages  19–45 of this document set out the competence and 
commitment Standards for registration as an EngTech, IEng or 
CEng. 
Engineers seeking registration should review the competence 
and commitment statements and use the examples to help 
them identify where they already have an appropriate level 
of competence, as well as what evidence they can present to 
demonstrate this. They should also identify areas where they 
currently lack the appropriate competence, in order to formulate 
plans to develop to the required level.
Pages  19–39 also include some examples of the kind of 
evidence which would contribute to demonstrating competence 
and commitment to the required Standards. However, the list 
of examples is only for guidance: it is not exhaustive, and the 
examples are not requirements for achieving professional 
registration.
For all categories, those seeking registration after completing 
their early career training should present a detailed record of their 
professional development, responsibilities and experience. To 
enable applicants to provide the best evidence for the Professional 
Review, this record should be verified by supervisors or mentors. 
Professional Review: assessing competence and 
commitment 
To become professionally registered, applicants must have their 
competence and commitment assessed through a Professional Individual assessment 
This process includes assessment of the applicant’s prior learning 
and underpinning knowledge needed to successfully perform 
their role. Applicants should submit information covering their 
education, career history and training record. It may also be helpful 
for applicants to include evidence of employer recognition of their 
competences and relevant skills.
If the Licensee considers, after this initial assessment, that it needs 
additional evidence of knowledge and understanding it will advise 
the applicant on the nature and extent of this. An applicant can 
demonstrate knowledge and understanding in a number of ways, 
such as:
 •Successfully completing further qualifications, either in whole or 
in part,
 •Providing a record of having completed work-based or 
experiential learning, 
 •Writing a technical report, based on experience, which 
demonstrates the applicant’s knowledge and understanding of 
engineering principles, or
 •Any combination of these.Many potential registrants have not had formal training to the 
required level but are able to demonstrate they have acquired 
the necessary underpinning knowledge through substantial work 
experience. Applicants who have acquired their underpinning 
knowledge and understanding through experiential learning or 
other qualifications can submit the relevant information to their 
Licensee for an initial assessment. \n\n--- PAGE 17 ---\n17
Review, overseen by the Licensee. This peer review process is 
carried out by registrants who are competent and trained to carry 
out this kind of assessment.
Applicants are assessed against the Standards listed in pages  
19–45 of this document, which may be adapted by the Licensee 
to relate specifically to the particular technologies or industries it is 
concerned with. There is no prescribed time period or minimum age 
requirement for the development of competence and commitment. 
The length of time it takes depends on many factors such as a 
person’s prior qualifications or experience, their job role, as well as 
personal circumstances such as career breaks or part time working. 
Scrutiny of qualifications
The first stage of the Professional Review is an assessment of 
the documented evidence which the applicant has submitted. 
The applicant’s Licensee will specify the requirements for this 
submission. The Licensee will examine the examples of evidence 
and assess how they meet the underpinning knowledge, 
understanding and competence requirements. 
Applicants will need to submit evidence in support of their 
application such as their:
 •Educational record and qualifications
 •Professional qualifications awarded by other national, regional 
or international authorities
 •Structured or other professional development
 •Areas of responsibility, management and leadership
 •Evidence of effective interpersonal skills
 •A plan for future professional developmentProfessional Review
After the submitted evidence has been reviewed, the Licensee will 
decide whether the applicant is ready to proceed to Professional 
Review. The Licensee will be able to advise applicants how to 
best present their evidence of training and experience. If there are 
shortfalls in evidence, Licensees will usually be able to suggest 
ways in which the applicant can address them. This may involve 
further learning, training or additional experience.
Once the submitted evidence has been accepted as a basis for the 
review, the next stage is a Professional Review Interview (PRI). 
This is mandatory for IEng and CEng applicants. For EngTech 
applicants there may be an interview, at the discretion of the 
Licensee, or the Professional Review may be based solely on the 
submitted documents.
When the Professional Review has been completed, the peer 
reviewers will make a recommendation to the Licensee’s 
designated committee. The committee will then make a decision 
on whether the applicant has demonstrated that they meet the 
required standards. A positive decision will result in registration of 
the applicant as an EngTech, IEng or CEng. Where the applicant 
has been unsuccessful the Licensee will provide feedback to help 
the applicant overcome any shortfalls in competence. \n\n--- PAGE 18 ---\n18
Retention of the title requires:
 •Continued membership of either:
 a Licensee licensed for that title or 
 a Professional Affiliate which has a registration agreement 
with a Licensee licensed for that title, 
and:
 •Payment of an annual fee, 
and: 
 •Undertaking and recording Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD).
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/cpd  \n\n--- PAGE 19 ---\n19
The Engineering Technician (EngTech) Standard 
Engineering Technicians apply proven techniques and 
procedures to the solution of practical engineering problems. 
Engineering Technicians shall demonstrate:
 •Engineering knowledge and understanding to apply technical 
and practical skills
 •Evidence of their contribution to the design, development, 
manufacture, commissioning, decommissioning, operation or 
maintenance of products, equipment, processes or services 
 •Supervisory or technical responsibility 
 •Effective interpersonal skills in communicating technical 
matters
 •The ability to operate in accordance with safe systems of 
work and to demonstrate appropriate understanding of the 
principles of sustainability 
 •Commitment to professional engineering values
An Engineering Technician will be able to demonstrate their 
competence in all of the areas listed, but the depth and extent of 
their experience and competence will vary with the context, nature 
and requirements of their role. They will demonstrate a level of 
competence and commitment in each area, (A1–E5), at a level 
which is consistent with their specific role. It is to be expected that 
they will have a higher level of competence in some areas than 
others and their role may provide limited experience in certain 
areas. However, they need to demonstrate an understanding 
of, and familiarity with, the key aspects of competence in those areas of limited experience as a minimum requirement while 
demonstrating higher levels of competence in those areas 
which are critical to their role. Overall, they will demonstrate 
an appropriate balance of competences to perform their role 
effectively at Engineering Technician level. 
The examples of evidence are intended as guidance to help 
identify activities that might demonstrate the required competence 
and commitment for Engineering Technician registration. They 
are intended as examples only as the most appropriate evidence 
will vary with each individual role. The list is not exhaustive and 
other types of evidence might be valid. There is no requirement 
to provide multiple examples of evidence for each area of 
competence, but examples from two or three projects or tasks 
would be useful. \n\n--- PAGE 20 ---\n20
Competence Examples of evidence
A. Knowledge and understanding 
Engineering Technicians shall 
use engineering knowledge and 
understanding to apply technical and 
practical skills.
This competence is about having 
knowledge of the technologies, standards 
and practices relevant to the applicant’s 
area of work and having evidence of 
maintaining and applying this knowledge.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Review and select appropriate 
techniques, procedures and 
methods to undertake tasks •Evaluating potential methods of carrying out an 
engineering task and selecting the most appropriate 
solution
 •Recognising a difficulty and then identifying an 
approach to resolve it
 •Identifying an improvement in a technique, procedure, 
process or method 
 •Interpreting and carrying out test procedures
2. Use appropriate scientific, 
technical or engineering 
principles. •Drawing on your technical knowledge to complete a 
task
 •Performing calculations using standard formulae 
 •Analysing performance or test data or comparing 
performance information with published material
B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems
Engineering Technicians shall 
contribute to the design, development, 
manufacture, construction, 
commissioning, decommissioning, 
operation or maintenance of products, 
equipment, processes, systems or 
services.
This competence is about the ability to 
apply engineering knowledge effectively 
and efficiently to the individual tasks which 
need to be undertaken in the applicant’s 
role. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they:
1. Identify problems and apply 
appropriate methods to identify 
causes and achieve satisfactory 
solutions •Using knowledge to identify a problem or an 
opportunity for improvement
 •Investigating a problem to identify the underlying cause
 •Identifying a solution to a problem or an improvement 
opportunity
 •Contributing to the design of an item or process
2.  Identify, organise and use 
resources effectively to complete 
tasks, with consideration for 
cost, quality, safety, security and 
environmental impact. •Balancing these factors in selecting appropriate 
materials 
 •Identifying precautions as a result of evaluating risks 
and other factors
 •Considering how waste can be minimised, recycled or 
disposed of safely if recycling is not possible
 •Contributing to best practice methods of continuous 
improvement
 •Improving the quality of an operation or process\n\n--- PAGE 21 ---\n21
Competence Examples of evidence
C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership
Engineering Technicians shall accept 
and exercise personal responsibility.
This competence is about the ability to 
plan and manage the applicant’s own 
work effectively and efficiently. It is also 
about the ability to consider and identify 
improvements to maintain quality in their 
work.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Work reliably and effectively 
without close supervision, to the 
appropriate codes of practice •Completing challenging tasks successfully within your 
area of work
 •Identifying issues which fall outside of your current 
knowledge and seeking advice
 •Identifying standards and codes of practice relevant to 
a new task
2. Accept responsibility for the 
work of themselves or others •Fully understanding drawings, permits to work, 
instructions or other similar documents after 
appropriate checking, and identifying issues
 •Inspecting work carried out by others 
 •Checking the status of equipment, the work 
environment and facilities and taking appropriate 
actions before commencing work
3. Accept, allocate and 
supervise technical and other 
tasks. •Ensuring that the scope of a task is clear before 
accepting and/or allocating it to others
 •Querying any aspect of a task which is not clear and/or 
providing an explanation if a query is raised by others
 •Learning from your own experience and/or providing 
constructive feedback when supervising or working 
with others\n\n--- PAGE 22 ---\n22
Competence Examples of evidence
D. Communication and 
interpersonal skills
Engineering Technicians shall 
use effective communication and 
interpersonal skills. 
This is the ability to work with others 
constructively, to explain ideas and 
proposals clearly and to discuss issues 
objectively and constructively.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively with 
others, at all levels, in English •Contributing to meetings and discussions 
 •Preparing communications, documents and reports  
on technical matters 
 •Exchanging information and providing advice to 
technical and non-technical colleagues
2. Work effectively with 
colleagues, clients, suppliers or 
the public •Contributing constructively as part of a team
 •Successfully resolving issues in discussions with team 
members, suppliers, clients and/or others
 •Persuading others to accept suggestions or 
recommendations
 •Identifying, agreeing and working towards collective 
goals
3. Demonstrate personal and 
social skills and awareness of 
diversity and inclusion issues. •Knowing and managing own emotions, strengths and 
weaknesses
 •Being confident and flexible in dealing with new and 
changing interpersonal situations
 •Creating, maintaining and enhancing productive 
working relationships, and resolving conflicts
 •Being supportive of the needs and concerns of others, 
especially where this relates to diversity and inclusion\n\n--- PAGE 23 ---\n23
Competence Examples of evidence
E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Engineering Technicians shall 
demonstrate commitment to an 
appropriate code of professional 
conduct, recognising obligations 
to society, the profession and the 
environment.
This competence is about ensuring that 
the applicant is acting in a professional 
manner in their work and in their dealings 
with others. An Engineering Technician 
should set a standard and example to 
others with regard to professionalism.This shall include the ability 
to:
1. Understand and comply with 
relevant codes of conduct •Demonstrating compliance with your Licensee’s Code of 
Professional Conduct
 •Working within all relevant legislative and regulatory 
frameworks, including social and employment legislatio n 
2. Understand the safety 
implications of their role and 
apply safe systems of work •Providing evidence of applying current safety 
requirements, such as risk assessment and other 
examples of good practice you adopt in your work 
 •A sound knowledge of health and safety legislation,  
for example: HASAW 1974, CDM regulations, ISO 
45001 and company safety policies
3. Understand the principles of 
sustainable development and 
apply them in their work •Recognising how sustainability principles, as described 
in the Guidance on Sustainability on page 48 ,  
can be applied in your day-to-day work
 •Identifying actions that you can and have taken to 
improve sustainability 
4. Carry out and record the 
Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD) necessary 
to maintain and enhance 
competence in their own area of 
practice  •Undertaking reviews of your own development needs
 •Planning how to meet personal and organisational 
objectives
 •Carrying out and recording planned and unplanned 
CPD activities
 •Maintaining evidence of competence development
 •Evaluating CPD outcomes against any plans made
 •Assisting others with their own CPD
5. Understand the ethical issues 
that may arise in their role and 
carry out their responsibilities in 
an ethical manner.  •Understanding the ethical issues that you may 
encounter in your role
 •Giving an example of where you have applied ethical 
principles as described in the Statement of Ethical 
Principles on page 47
 •Giving an example of where you have applied 
or upheld ethical principles as defined by your 
organisation or company\n\n--- PAGE 24 ---\n24
Incorporated Engineers maintain and manage applications 
of current and developing technology, and may undertake 
engineering design, development, manufacture, construction 
and operation.
Incorporated Engineers shall demonstrate:
 •The theoretical knowledge to solve problems in established 
technologies using well proven analytical techniques
 •Successful application of the knowledge to deliver 
engineering tasks or services using established technologies 
and methods
 •Contribution to the financial and planning aspects of projects 
or tasks and contribution to leading and developing other 
professional staff
 •Effective interpersonal skills in communicating technical 
matters
 •The ability to specify and operate to safe systems of 
work and to demonstrate appropriate consideration of the 
principles of sustainability 
 •Commitment to professional engineering valuesThe Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Standard 
An Incorporated Engineer will be able to demonstrate their 
competence in all of the areas listed, but the depth and extent 
of their experience and competence will vary with the nature 
and requirements of their role. They will demonstrate a level of 
competence and commitment in each area (A1–E5) at a level 
which is consistent with their specific role. It is to be expected that 
they will have a higher level of competence in some areas than others and their role may provide limited experience in certain 
areas. However, they need to demonstrate an understanding of, 
and familiarity with, the key aspects of competence in all areas 
as a minimum requirement while demonstrating higher levels of 
competence in those areas which are critical to their role. Overall, 
they must demonstrate an appropriate balance of competences to 
perform their role effectively at Incorporated Engineer level. 
The examples of evidence are intended as guidance to help 
identify activities that might demonstrate the required competence 
and commitment for Incorporated Engineer registration. They 
are intended as examples only as the most appropriate evidence 
will vary with each individual role. The list is not exhaustive and 
other types of evidence might be valid. There is no requirement 
to provide multiple examples of evidence for each area of 
competence, but examples from two or three projects or tasks 
would be useful. \n\n--- PAGE 25 ---\n25
Competence Examples of evidence
A. Knowledge and understanding
Incorporated Engineers shall use 
a combination of general and 
specialist engineering knowledge and 
understanding to apply existing and 
emerging technology.
This competence is about having 
knowledge of the technologies, 
standards and practices relevant to the 
applicant’s area of practice and having 
evidence of maintaining and applying 
this knowledge.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Have maintained and 
extended a sound theoretical 
approach to the application 
of technology in engineering 
practice •Identifying the limits of your knowledge and skills
 •Taking steps to develop and extend personal knowledge 
of appropriate technology, both current and emerging
 •Applying newly gained knowledge successfully in a task 
or project
 •Reviewing current procedures and processes and 
recommended improvements or changes to reflect best 
practice 
 •Developing knowledge needed to work in a new industry 
area or discipline
2. Use a sound evidence-
based approach to problem-
solving and contribute to 
continuous improvement. •Applying knowledge and experience to investigate and 
solve problems arising during engineering tasks and 
implementing corrective action
 •Identifying opportunities for improvements and how these 
have been (or could be) implemented
 •Using an established process to analyse issues and 
establish priorities\n\n--- PAGE 26 ---\n26
Competence Examples of evidence
B. Design, development and 
solving engineering problems
Incorporated Engineers shall apply 
appropriate theoretical and practical 
methods to design, develop, 
manufacture, construct, commission, 
operate, maintain, decommission 
and recycle engineering processes, 
systems, services and products.
This competence is about the ability 
to identify appropriate methods and 
approaches to use to undertake a task 
within their area of practice and to 
make a significant contribution to the 
development of a design or process or 
the maintenance of operations.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Identify, review and select 
techniques, procedures 
and methods to undertake 
engineering tasks •Establishing the engineering steps needed to carry out a 
task efficiently
 •Identifying the available products or processes needed to 
undertake an engineering task and establishing a means 
of identifying the most suitable solution
 •Preparing technical specifications
 •Reviewing and comparing responses to the technical 
aspects of tender invitations
 •Establishing user requirements for improvements
2. Contribute to the design and 
development of engineering 
solutions •Contributing to the identification and specification of 
design and development requirements for engineering 
products, processes, systems and services
 •Identifying operational risks and evaluating possible 
engineering solutions, taking account of cost, quality, 
safety, reliability, accessibility, appearance, fitness 
for purpose, security (including cyber security), 
intellectual property constraints and opportunities, and 
environmental impact
 •Collecting and analysing results
 •Carrying out necessary tests 
3. Implement design solutions 
for equipment or processes and 
contribute to their evaluation. •Identifying the resources required for implementation
 •Implementing design solutions, taking account of 
critical constraints, including due concern for safety and 
sustainability 
 •Identifying problems during implementation and taking 
corrective action
 •Contributing to recommendations for improvement and 
actively learning from feedback on results\n\n--- PAGE 27 ---\n27
Competence Examples of evidence
C. Responsibility, management 
and leadership
Incorporated Engineers shall 
provide technical and commercial 
management.
This competence is about the ability 
to plan the applicant’s own work and 
manage or specify the work of others 
effectively, efficiently and in a way which 
provides leadership at an appropriate 
level, whether technical or commercial. 
Leadership is not necessarily about 
having a formal line management role. 
In matrix management and other types 
of organisational structure, where 
Incorporated Engineers are working 
within complex and varied working 
relationships, they will provide leadership 
to achieve objectives. This competence 
is also about the ability to consider and 
identify improvements to quality. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Plan the work and resources 
needed to enable effective 
implementation of engineering 
tasks and projects •Identifying factors affecting the project implementation
 •Carrying out holistic and systematic risk identification, 
assessment and management
 •Preparing and agreeing implementation plans and method 
statements
 •Securing the necessary resources and confirming roles in 
a project team
 •Applying the necessary contractual arrangements with 
other stakeholders (clients, subcontractors, suppliers, etc)
2. Manage (organise, direct 
and control), programme or 
schedule, budget and resource 
elements of engineering tasks 
or projects •Operating appropriate management systems
 •Working to the agreed quality standards, programme and 
budget, within legal and statutory requirements
 •Managing work teams, coordinating project activities
 •Identifying variations from quality standards, programme 
and budgets, and taking corrective action 
 •Evaluating performance and recommending improvements
3. Manage teams, or the input 
of others, into own work and 
assist others to meet changing 
technical and management 
needs •Agreeing objectives and work plans with teams and 
individuals
 •Reinforcing team commitment to professional standards
 •Leading and supporting team and individual development
 •Assessing team and individual performance, and 
providing feedback
 •Seeking input from other teams or specialists where 
needed and managing the relationship 
4. Take an active role 
in continuous quality 
improvement. •Ensuring the application of quality management 
principles by team members and colleagues
 •Managing operations to maintain quality standards  
eg ISO 9000, EQFM 
 •Evaluating projects and making recommendations for 
improvement
 •Implementing and sharing the results of lessons learned\n\n--- PAGE 28 ---\n28
Competence Examples of evidence
D. Communication and 
interpersonal skills
Incorporated Engineers shall 
demonstrate effective communication 
and interpersonal skills.
This is the ability to work with others 
constructively, to explain ideas and 
proposals clearly and to discuss issues 
objectively and constructively. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively 
with others, at all levels, in 
English •Contributing to, chairing and recording meetings and 
discussions
 •Preparing communications, documents and reports on 
technical matters
 •Exchanging information and providing advice to technical 
and non-technical colleagues
 •Engaging or interacting with professional networks
2. Clearly present and discuss 
proposals, justifications and 
conclusions •Preparing and delivering appropriate presentations
 •Managing debates with audiences
 •Feeding the results back to improve the proposals
 •Contributing to the awareness of risk
3. Demonstrate personal and 
social skills and awareness of 
diversity and inclusion issues. •Knowing and managing own emotions, strengths and 
weaknesses
 •Being confident and flexible in dealing with new and 
changing interpersonal situations
 •Identifying, agreeing and working towards collective 
goals
 •Creating, maintaining and enhancing productive working 
relationships, and resolving conflicts
 •Being supportive of the needs and concerns of others, 
especially where this relates to diversity and inclusion\n\n--- PAGE 29 ---\n29
Competence Examples of evidence
E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Incorporated Engineers shall 
demonstrate a personal commitment 
to professional standards, 
recognising obligations to society, the 
profession and the environment.
This competence is about ensuring that 
the applicant is acting in a professional 
manner in their work and in their dealings 
with others. An Incorporated Engineer 
should set a standard and example to 
others with regard to professionalism. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Understand and comply with 
relevant codes of conduct •Demonstrating compliance with your Licensee’s Code of 
Professional Conduct 
 •Identifying aspects of the Code particularly relevant to 
your role
 •Managing work within all relevant legislative and 
regulatory frameworks, including social and employment 
legislation
2. Understand the safety 
implications of their role and 
manage, apply and improve 
safe systems of work •Identifying and taking responsibility for your own 
obligations for health, safety and welfare issues
 •Managing systems that satisfy health, safety and welfare 
requirements 
 •Developing and implementing appropriate hazard 
identification and risk management systems and culture
 •Managing, evaluating and improving these systems
 •Applying a sound knowledge of health and safety 
legislation, for example: HASAW 1974, CDM regulations, 
ISO 45001 and company safety policies
3. Understand the principles of 
sustainable development and 
apply them in their work  •Operating and acting responsibly, taking account of the 
need to progress environmental, social and economic 
outcomes simultaneously
 •Recognising how sustainability principles, as described 
in the Guidance on Sustainability on page 48  can be 
applied in your day-to-day work
 •Providing products and services which maintain and 
enhance the quality of the environment and community, 
and meet financial objectives
 •Understanding and encouraging stakeholder involvement 
in sustainable development
 •Using resources efficiently and effectively
 •Taking action to minimise environmental impact in your 
area of responsibility\n\n--- PAGE 30 ---\n30
Competence Examples of evidence
E. Personal and professional 
commitment (continued)The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they:
4. Carry out and record the 
Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD) necessary 
to maintain and enhance 
competence in their own area 
of practice  •Undertaking reviews of your own development needs
 •Planning how to meet personal and organisational 
objectives
 •Carrying out and recording planned and unplanned CPD 
activities
 •Maintaining evidence of competence development
 •Evaluating CPD outcomes against any plans made 
 •Assisting others with their own CPD
5. Understand the ethical 
issues that may arise in 
their role and carry out their 
responsibilities in an ethical 
manner.  •Understanding the ethical issues that you may encounter 
in your role
 •Giving an example of where you have applied ethical 
principles as described in the Statement of Ethical 
Principles on page 47
 •Giving an example of where you have applied or upheld 
ethical principles as defined by your organisation or 
company\n\n--- PAGE 31 ---\n31
The Chartered Engineer (CEng) Standard 
Chartered Engineers develop solutions to complex engineering 
problems using new or existing technologies, and through 
innovation, creativity and technical analysis.
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate:
 •The theoretical knowledge to solve problems in new and 
established technologies and to develop new analytical 
techniques
 •Successful application of the knowledge to deliver innovative 
products and services or taking technical responsibility for 
complex engineering systems 
 •Responsibility for the financial and planning aspects of 
projects, sub-projects or tasks
 •Leadership and development of other professional staff 
through management, mentoring or coaching
 •Effective interpersonal skills in communicating technical 
matters
 •Understanding of the safety and sustainability implications of 
their work, seeking to improve aspects where feasible
 •Commitment to professional engineering values
A Chartered Engineer will be able to demonstrate their 
competence in all of the areas listed, but the depth and extent 
of their experience and competence will vary with the nature 
and requirements of their role. They will demonstrate a level of 
competence and commitment in each area, (A1–E5), at a level 
which is consistent with their specific role. It is to be expected that they will have a higher level of competence in some areas than 
others and their role may provide limited experience in certain 
areas. However, they need to demonstrate an understanding of, 
and familiarity with, the key aspects of competence in all areas 
as a minimum requirement while demonstrating higher levels of 
competence in those areas which are critical to their role. Overall, 
they will demonstrate an appropriate balance of competences to 
perform their role effectively at Chartered Engineer level. 
The examples of evidence are intended as guidance to help 
identify activities that might demonstrate the required competence 
and commitment for Chartered Engineer registration. They are 
intended as examples only as the most appropriate evidence 
will vary with each individual role. The list is not exhaustive and 
other types of evidence might be valid. There is no requirement 
to provide multiple examples of evidence for each area of 
competence, but examples from two or three projects or tasks 
would be useful. \n\n--- PAGE 32 ---\n32
Competence Examples of evidence
A. Knowledge and understanding
Chartered Engineers shall use 
a combination of general and 
specialist engineering knowledge and 
understanding to optimise the application 
of advanced and complex systems.
This competence is about the ability to 
understand underpinning technical principles 
relevant to the applicant’s area of practice 
and applying them to develop technical 
solutions. This could involve technical 
solutions for novel problems or dealing 
with significant technical complexity. This 
may involve the integration of a range of 
technologies and consideration of other 
factors. This competence requires that an 
applicant is maintaining and developing their 
knowledge in their field of practice and not 
just that required for specific tasks.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Have maintained and 
extended a sound theoretical 
approach to enable them to 
develop their particular role •Formal training related to your role 
 •Learning and developing new engineering 
knowledge in a different industry or role 
 •Understanding the current and emerging 
technology and technical best practice in your area 
of expertise
 •Developing a broader and deeper knowledge base 
through research and experimentation
 •Learning and developing new engineering theories 
and techniques in the workplace
2. Are developing technological 
solutions to unusual or 
challenging problems, using their 
knowledge and understanding 
and/or dealing with complex 
technical issues or situations 
with significant levels of risk. •Carrying out technical research and development
 •Developing new designs, processes or systems 
based on new or evolving technology
 •Carrying out complex and/or non-standard technical 
analyses
 •Developing solutions involving complex or multi-
disciplinary technology
 •Developing and evaluating continuous improvement 
systems
 •Developing solutions in safety-critical industries or 
applications\n\n--- PAGE 33 ---\n33
Competence Examples of evidence
B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems
Chartered Engineers shall apply 
appropriate theoretical and practical 
methods to the analysis and solution of 
engineering problems.
This competence is about the ability to 
apply engineering knowledge effectively and 
efficiently to the individual tasks which need 
to be undertaken in the applicant’s role. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Take an active role in the 
identification and definition of 
project requirements, problems 
and opportunities •Identifying projects or technical improvements to 
products, processes or systems
 •Preparing specifications, taking account of 
functional and other requirements
 •Establishing user requirements
 •Reviewing specifications and tenders to identify 
technical issues and potential improvements
 •Carrying out technical risk analysis and identifying 
mitigation measures
 •Considering and implementing new and emerging 
technologies 
2. Can identify the appropriate 
investigations and research 
needed to undertake the 
design, development and 
analysis required to complete an 
engineering task and conduct 
these activities effectively •Identifying and agreeing appropriate research 
methodologies
 •Investigating a technical issue, identifying potential 
solutions and determining the factors needed to 
compare them
 •Identifying and carrying out physical tests or trials 
and analysing and evaluating the results
 •Carrying out technical simulations or analysis
 •Preparing, presenting and agreeing design 
recommendations, with appropriate analysis of risk, 
and taking account of cost, quality, safety, reliability, 
accessibility, appearance, fitness for purpose, 
security (including cyber security), intellectual 
property constraints and opportunities, and 
environmental impact\n\n--- PAGE 34 ---\n34
Competence Examples of evidence
B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems (continued)The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
3. Can implement engineering 
tasks and evaluate the 
effectiveness of engineering 
solutions. •Ensuring that the application of the design results in 
the appropriate practical outcome
 •Implementing design solutions, taking account of 
critical constraints, including due concern for safety, 
sustainability and disposal or decommissioning 
 •Identifying and implementing lessons learned
 •Evaluating existing designs or processes and 
identifying faults or potential improvements 
including risk, safety and life cycle considerations
 •Actively learning from feedback on results to 
improve future design solutions and build best 
practice\n\n--- PAGE 35 ---\n35
Competence Examples of evidence
C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate 
technical and commercial leadership.
This competence is about the ability to 
plan the applicant’s own work and manage 
or specify the work of others effectively, 
efficiently, and in a way which provides 
leadership at an appropriate level, whether 
technical or commercial. Leadership is 
not necessarily about having a formal line 
management role. In matrix management 
and other types of organisational structure, 
where Chartered Engineers are working 
within complex and varied working 
relationships, they will provide leadership 
to achieve objectives. This competence is 
also about the ability to consider and identify 
improvements to quality. The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Plan the work and resources 
needed to enable effective 
implementation of a significant 
engineering task or project •Preparing budgets and associated work 
programmes for projects or tasks
 •Systematically reviewing the factors affecting 
the project implementation including safety, 
sustainability and disposal or decommissioning 
considerations
 •Carrying out a task or project risk assessment and 
identifying mitigation measures
 •Leading on preparing and agreeing implementation 
plans and method statements
 •Negotiating and agreeing arrangements with 
customers, colleagues, contractors and other 
stakeholders, including regulatory bodies
 •Ensuring that information flow is appropriate and 
effective
2. Manage (organise, direct and 
control), programme or schedule, 
budget and resource elements of 
a significant engineering task or 
project •Operating or defining appropriate management 
systems including risk registers and contingency 
systems
 •Managing the balance between quality, cost and 
time
 •Monitoring progress and associated costs and cost 
forecasts, taking appropriate actions when required
 •Establishing and maintaining appropriate quality 
standards within legal and statutory requirements
 •Interfacing effectively with customers, contractors 
and other stakeholders\n\n--- PAGE 36 ---\n36
Competence Examples of evidence
C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership (continued)The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they:
3. Lead teams or technical 
specialisms and assist others 
to meet changing technical and 
managerial needs •Agreeing objectives and work plans with teams and 
individuals
 •Reinforcing team commitment to professional 
standards
 •Leading and supporting team and individual 
development
 •Assessing team and individual performance, and 
providing feedback
 •Seeking input from other teams or specialists where 
needed and managing the relationship 
 •Providing specialist knowledge, guidance and input 
in your specialism to engineering teams, engineers, 
customers, management and relevant stakeholders
 •Developing and delivering a teaching module at 
Masters level, or leading a University research 
programme
4. Bring about continuous quality 
improvement and promote best 
practice. •Promoting quality throughout the organisation as 
well as its customer and supplier networks
 •Developing and maintaining operations to meet 
quality standards eg ISO 9000, EQFM
 •Supporting or directing project evaluation and 
proposing recommendations for improvement
 •Implementing and sharing the results of lessons 
learned\n\n--- PAGE 37 ---\n37
Competence Examples of evidence
D. Communication and interpersonal 
skills
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate 
effective communication and 
interpersonal skills.
This is the ability to work with others 
constructively, to explain ideas and 
proposals clearly and to discuss issues 
objectively and constructively.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively with 
others, at all levels, in English •Preparing reports, drawings, specifications and 
other documentation on complex matters
 •Leading, chairing, contributing to and recording 
meetings and discussions
 •Exchanging information and providing advice to 
technical and non-technical colleagues
 •Engaging or interacting with professional networks
2. Clearly present and discuss 
proposals, justifications and 
conclusions •Contributing to scientific papers or articles as an 
author
 •Preparing and delivering presentations on strategic 
matters
 •Preparing bids, proposals or studies
 •Identifying, agreeing and leading work towards 
collective goals
3. Demonstrate personal and 
social skills and awareness of 
diversity and inclusion issues. •Knowing and managing own emotions, strengths 
and weaknesses
 •Being confident and flexible in dealing with new and 
changing interpersonal situations
 •Identifying, agreeing and working towards collective 
goals
 •Creating, maintaining and enhancing productive 
working relationships, and resolving conflicts
 •Being supportive of the needs and concerns of 
others, especially where this relates to diversity and 
inclusion\n\n--- PAGE 38 ---\n38
Competence Examples of evidence
E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate 
a personal commitment to professional 
standards, recognising obligations 
to society, the profession and the 
environment.
This competence is about ensuring that the 
applicant is acting in a professional manner 
in their work and in their dealings with 
others. A Chartered Engineer should set a 
standard and example to others with regard 
to professionalism.The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
1. Understand and comply with 
relevant codes of conduct •Demonstrating compliance with your Licensee’s 
Code of Professional Conduct 
 •Identifying aspects of the Code which are 
particularly relevant to your role
 •Being aware of the legislative and regulatory 
frameworks relevant to your role and how they 
conform to them
 •Leading work within relevant legislation and 
regulatory frameworks, including social and 
employment legislation
2. Understand the safety 
implications of their role and 
manage, apply and improve safe 
systems of work •Identifying and taking responsibility for your own 
obligations and ensuring that others assume similar 
responsibility for health, safety and welfare issues
 •Ensuring that systems satisfy health, safety and 
welfare requirements
 •Developing and implementing appropriate hazard 
identification and risk management systems and 
culture
 •Managing, evaluating and improving these systems
 •Applying a sound knowledge of health and safety 
legislation, for example: HASAW 1974, CDM 
regulations, ISO 45001 and company safety 
policies\n\n--- PAGE 39 ---\n39
Competence Examples of evidence
E. Personal and professional 
commitment (continued)The applicant shall 
demonstrate that they: 
3. Understand the principles of 
sustainable development and 
apply them in their work •Operating and acting responsibly, taking account 
of the need to progress environmental, social and 
economic outcomes simultaneously
 •Providing products and services which maintain 
and enhance the quality of the environment and 
community, and meet financial objectives
 •Recognising how sustainability principles, as 
described in the Guidance on Sustainability on 
page 48 , can be applied in your day-to-day work
 •Understanding and securing stakeholder involvement 
in sustainable development
 •Using resources efficiently and effectively in all 
activities
 •Taking action to minimise environmental impact in 
your area of responsibility 
4. Carry out and record the 
Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD) necessary 
to maintain and enhance 
competence in their own area of 
practice  •Undertaking reviews of your own development needs
 •Planning how to meet personal and organisational 
objectives
 •Carrying out planned and unplanned CPD activities
 •Maintaining evidence of competence development
 •Evaluating CPD outcomes against any plans made
 •Assisting others with their own CPD
5. Understand the ethical issues 
that may arise in their role and 
carry out their responsibilities in 
an ethical manner.  •Understanding the ethical issues that you may 
encounter in your role
 •Giving an example of where you have applied 
ethical principles as described in the Statement of 
Ethical Principles on page 47
 •Giving an example of where you have applied 
or upheld ethical principles as defined by your 
organisation or company\n\n--- PAGE 40 ---\n40
Comparison table for EngTech, IEng and CEng Standards
This table can also be downloaded as a PDF, along with a version which includes examples of the types of evidence. 
Please see: www.engc.org.uk/ukspec
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
Engineering Technicians apply proven 
techniques and procedures to the solution 
of practical engineering problems. 
Engineering Technicians shall 
demonstrate:
 •Engineering knowledge and 
understanding to apply technical and 
practical skills
 •Evidence of their contribution to 
either the design, development, 
manufacture, commissioning, 
decommissioning, operation or 
maintenance of products, equipment, 
processes or services 
 •Supervisory or technical responsibility 
 •Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters
 •The ability to operate in accordance 
with safe systems of work and 
to demonstrate appropriate 
understanding of the principles of 
sustainability 
 •Commitment to professional 
engineering values.Incorporated Engineers maintain and 
manage applications of current and 
developing technology, and may undertake 
engineering design, development, 
manufacture, construction and operation.
Incorporated Engineers shall demonstrate:
 •The theoretical knowledge to solve 
problems in developed technologies 
using well proven analytical techniques
 •Successful application of their 
knowledge to deliver engineering 
projects or services using established 
technologies and methods
 •Contribution to the financial and 
planning aspects of projects or tasks 
and to leading and developing other 
professional staff
 •Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters
 •The ability to specify and operate 
to safe systems of work and to 
demonstrate appropriate consideration 
of the principles of sustainability 
 •Commitment to professional 
engineering values.Chartered Engineers develop solutions to 
complex engineering problems using new or 
existing technologies, and through innovation, 
creativity and technical analysis.
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate:
 •The theoretical knowledge to solve 
problems in new and established 
technologies and to develop new analytical 
techniques
 •Successful application of the knowledge 
to deliver innovative products and services 
and/or taking technical responsibility for 
complex engineering systems 
 •Responsibility for the financial and planning 
aspects of projects, sub-projects or tasks
 •Leadership and development of other 
professional staff through management, 
mentoring or coaching
 •Effective interpersonal skills in 
communicating technical matters
 •Understanding of the safety and 
sustainability implications of their work, 
seeking to improve aspects where feasible
 •Commitment to professional engineering 
values.\n\n--- PAGE 41 ---\n41
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
The Competence and Commitment 
Standard for Engineering Technicians
 
For guidance and examples of types of 
evidence that demonstrate the required 
competence and commitment for 
registration as an Engineering Technician, 
see the table on pages  20–23.
Engineering Technicians must be 
competent throughout their working life, 
by virtue of their education, training and 
experience in the following ways:The Competence and Commitment 
Standard for Incorporated Engineers
 
For guidance and examples of types of 
evidence that demonstrate the required 
competence and commitment for 
registration as an Incorporated Engineer, 
see the table on pages  25–30.
Incorporated Engineers must be competent 
throughout their working life, by virtue of 
their education, training and experience in 
the following ways:The Competence and Commitment Standard 
for Chartered Engineers
 
For guidance and examples of types of 
evidence that demonstrate the required 
competence and commitment for registration as 
a Chartered Engineer, see the table on pages 
32–39. 
Chartered Engineers must be competent 
throughout their working life, by virtue of their 
education, training and experience in the 
following ways:
A. Knowledge and understanding
Engineering Technicians shall 
use engineering knowledge and 
understanding to apply technical and 
practical skills.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Review and select appropriate 
techniques, procedures and methods to 
undertake tasks
2. Use appropriate scientific, technical or 
engineering principles.A. Knowledge and understanding
Incorporated Engineers shall use 
a combination of general and 
specialist engineering knowledge and 
understanding to apply existing and 
emerging technology .
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Have maintained and extended a sound 
theoretical approach to the application of 
technology in engineering practice
2. Use a sound evidence-based approach 
to problem-solving and contribute to 
continuous improvement.A. Knowledge and understanding
Chartered Engineers shall use a 
combination of general and specialist 
engineering knowledge and understanding 
to optimise the application of advanced and 
complex systems .
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Have maintained and extended a sound 
theoretical approach to enable them to develop 
their particular role
2. Are developing technological solutions to 
unusual or challenging problems, using their 
knowledge and understanding and/or dealing 
with complex technical issues or situations with 
significant levels of risk.\n\n--- PAGE 42 ---\n42
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems 
Engineering Technicians shall 
contribute to the design, development, 
manufacture, construction, 
commissioning, decommissioning, 
operation or maintenance of products, 
equipment, processes, systems or 
services.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Identify problems and apply 
appropriate methods to identify causes 
and achieve satisfactory solutions
2. Identify, organise and use resources 
effectively to complete tasks, with 
consideration for cost, quality, safety, 
security and environmental impact.B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems
Incorporated Engineers shall apply 
appropriate theoretical and practical 
methods to design, develop, 
manufacture, construct, commission, 
operate, maintain, decommission 
and recycle engineering processes, 
systems, services and products.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Identify, review and select techniques, 
procedures and methods to undertake 
engineering tasks
2. Contribute to the design and 
development of engineering solutions 
3. Implement design solutions for 
equipment or processes and contribute to 
their evaluation.B. Design, development and solving 
engineering problems
Chartered Engineers shall apply appropriate 
theoretical and practical methods to the 
analysis and solution of engineering 
problems.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Take an active role in the identification and 
definition of project requirements, problems and 
opportunities
2. Can identify the appropriate investigations 
and research needed to undertake the design, 
development and analysis required to complete 
an engineering task and conduct these 
activities effectively
3. Can implement engineering tasks and 
evaluate the effectiveness of engineering 
solutions.\n\n--- PAGE 43 ---\n43
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership
Engineering Technicians shall accept 
and exercise personal responsibility.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Work reliably and effectively without 
close supervision, to the appropriate 
codes of practice
2. Accept responsibility for the work of 
themselves or others
3. Accept, allocate and supervise 
technical and other tasks.C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership
Incorporated Engineers shall provide 
technical and commercial management.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Plan the work and resources needed 
to enable effective implementation of 
engineering tasks and projects
2. Manage (organise, direct and control), 
programme or schedule, budget and 
resource elements of engineering tasks or 
projects
3. Manage teams, or the input of others, 
into own work and assist others to meet 
changing technical and management 
needs
4. Take an active role in continuous quality 
improvement.C. Responsibility, management and 
leadership
Chartered Engineers shall provide technical 
and commercial leadership.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Plan the work and resources needed to 
enable effective implementation of a significant 
engineering task or project
2. Manage (organise, direct and control), 
programme or schedule, budget and resource 
elements of a significant engineering task or 
project
3. Lead teams or technical specialisms and 
assist others to meet changing technical and 
managerial needs
4. Bring about continuous quality improvement 
and promote best practice.\n\n--- PAGE 44 ---\n44
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
D. Communication and 
interpersonal skills
Engineering Technicians shall 
use effective communication and 
interpersonal skills.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively with others, at 
all levels, in English
2. Work effectively with colleagues, 
clients, suppliers or the public
3. Demonstrate personal and social skills 
and awareness of diversity and inclusion 
issues.D. Communication and interpersonal 
skills
Incorporated Engineers shall 
demonstrate effective communication 
and interpersonal skills.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively with others, at 
all levels, in English
2. Clearly present and discuss proposals, 
justifications and conclusions
3. Demonstrate personal and social skills 
and awareness of diversity and inclusion 
issues.D. Communication and interpersonal 
skills
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate 
effective communication and interpersonal 
skills.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Communicate effectively with others, at all 
levels, in English
2. Clearly present and discuss proposals, 
justifications and conclusions
3. Demonstrate personal and social skills and 
awareness of diversity and inclusion issues.\n\n--- PAGE 45 ---\n45
Engineering Technician (EngTech) Incorporated Engineer (IEng) Chartered Engineer (CEng)
E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Engineering Technicians shall 
demonstrate a personal commitment 
to an appropriate code of professional 
conduct, recognising obligations 
to society, the profession and the 
environment.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they:
1. Understand and comply with relevant 
codes of conduct
2. Understand the safety implications of 
their role and apply safe systems of work 
3. Understand the principles of 
sustainable development and apply them 
in their work
4. Carry out and record the Continuing 
Professional Development (CPD) 
necessary to maintain and enhance 
competence in their own area of practice 
5. Understand the ethical issues that 
may arise in their role and carry out their 
responsibilities in an ethical manner.E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Incorporated Engineers shall 
demonstrate a personal commitment 
to professional standards, recognising 
obligations to society, the profession 
and the environment.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Understand and comply with relevant 
codes of conduct
2. Understand the safety implications of 
their role and manage, apply and improve 
safe systems of work
3. Understand the principles of sustainable 
development and apply them in their work 
4. Carry out and record the Continuing 
Professional Development (CPD) 
necessary to maintain and enhance 
competence in their own area of practice 
5. Understand the ethical issues that 
may arise in their role and carry out their 
responsibilities in an ethical manner.E. Personal and professional 
commitment
Chartered Engineers shall demonstrate 
a personal commitment to professional 
standards, recognising obligations to 
society, the profession and the environment.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they: 
1. Understand and comply with relevant codes 
of conduct
2. Understand the safety implications of their 
role and manage, apply and improve safe 
systems of work
3. Understand the principles of sustainable 
development and apply them in their work
4. Carry out and record the Continuing 
Professional Development (CPD) necessary to 
maintain and enhance competence in their own 
area of practice 
5. Understand the ethical issues that may arise 
in their role and carry out their responsibilities in 
an ethical manner.\n\n--- PAGE 46 ---\n46
Continuing Professional Development 
opportunities which might arise
 •Record their CPD activities
 •Reflect on what they have learned or achieved through their 
CPD activities and record these reflections
 •Evaluate their CPD activities against any objectives they have 
set and record this evaluation
 •Review their learning and development plan regularly, following 
reflection and assessment of future needs
 •Support the learning and development of others through 
activities such as mentoring and sharing professional expertise 
and knowledge
At Professional Review, all applicants will need to demonstrate 
how they meet their CPD obligations and show that they 
understand that this requires an ongoing commitment.
Sampling registrants’ CPD records 
The Licensees undertake annual random samples of professionally 
active registrants’ CPD records and provide appropriate feedback, 
as described in the Engineering Council’s Regulations for 
Registration (RfR).
Registrants who are not professionally active (eg retired or on a 
career break) may request exemption from a sample. The intention 
behind CPD sampling is not to police registrants, but to encourage 
a culture in which registrants will naturally engage in CPD and take 
ownership of their own learning and development.Continuing professional development (CPD) is essential for 
maintaining and enhancing the required competence and 
commitment, as well as for developing new competences. This 
obligation underpins the value of the professional titles of EngTech, 
IEng and CEng, and enables society to have confidence in the 
engineering profession.
CPD has several purposes:
 •To assure continuing competence in a current job
 •To prepare for a different role
 •To follow a longer-term career development plan
 •To enhance professionalism in a wider context than a specific 
job role. 
More details on the nature, purpose and value of CPD can be 
found in the CPD Policy Statement. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/cpd
CPD Code for Registrants
Engineering professionals should take all necessary steps 
to maintain and enhance their competence through CPD. In 
particular, they should:
 •Take ownership of their learning and development needs 
and develop a plan to indicate how they might meet these, in 
discussion with their employer, as appropriate
 •Carry out a variety of development activities, both in 
accordance with this plan and in response to other \n\n--- PAGE 47 ---\n47
Recording evidence of CPD undertaken is a requirement of 
professional registration. Professionally active registrants who 
persistently do not respond to or engage with requests for CPD 
Guidance for Licensee Codes of 
Professional Conduct 
All registrants are expected to observe the requirements of the 
Code of Professional Conduct (the Code) of the Licensee they 
have joined. This Code of Professional Conduct places a personal 
obligation on its members to act with integrity and in the public 
interest, in accordance with the Statement of Ethical Principles.
Each Licensee will have appropriate disciplinary processes in 
place to address breaches of their Code of Professional Conduct.
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/conduct
Guidance on Risk
This guidance, published by the Engineering Council, lists six 
principles to guide and motivate professional engineers and 
technicians in identifying, assessing, managing and communicating 
about risk. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/riskrecords from a Licensee will be removed from the Engineering 
Council Register. 
Professional and Ethical Behaviour 
Statement of Ethical Principles
Engineering professionals work to enhance the wellbeing of 
society. In doing so they are required to maintain and promote high 
ethical standards and challenge unethical behaviour. 
This Statement of Ethical Principles, published by the Engineering 
Council and the Royal Academy of Engineering, lists four 
fundamental principles to guide engineers and technicians in their 
professional life:
 •Honesty and integrity 
 •Respect for life, law, the environment and public good 
 •Accuracy and rigour 
 •Leadership and communication 
These express the beliefs and values of the profession and are 
explained in the Statement of Ethical Principles. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/ethics\n\n--- PAGE 48 ---\n48
Guidance on Sustainability
This guidance, published by the Engineering Council, lists six 
principles to guide and motivate professional engineers and 
technicians when making decisions for clients, employers and 
society which affect sustainability. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/sustainability
Guidance on Whistleblowing 
This guidance, published by the Engineering Council, explains 
what whistleblowing is and the processes that engineers and 
technicians should follow when confronted with a potential 
whistleblowing situation: 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/whistleblowing
Guidance on Security 
This guidance, published by the Engineering Council, lists six 
key principles to guide engineers and technicians in identifying, 
assessing, managing and communicating issues about security. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/securityInternational Activity
To ensure that professionally registered engineers’ skills are 
recognised internationally, the Engineering Council is active within 
a number of multilateral mutual recognition agreements with 
other national engineering bodies. These agreements establish 
internationally benchmarked standards which allow signatory 
bodies to recognise each other’s academic and professional 
qualifications, aiding mobility. In particular, the Engineering 
Council was a founder member of the Washington Accord and has 
subsequently worked with international partners to develop further 
agreements. The governance of these sits within the International 
Engineering Alliance (IEA).  
 
The Engineering Council is a member of: 
 •The Agreement for International Engineering Technicians (AIET)
 •The Dublin Accord (DA)
 •The International Engineering Technologists Agreement (IETA)
 •The International Professional Engineers Agreement (IPEA)
 •The Sydney Accord (SA)
 •The Washington Accord (WA)
The Engineering Council is a member of the European Network of 
Accreditation of Engineering Education (ENAEE), which authorises 
accreditation and quality assurance agencies to award the EUR-
ACE® label to accredited engineering degree programmes. In 
addition, the Engineering Council works within the European 
Federation of National Engineering Associations (FEANI) to 
strengthen the voice of engineers at the European level. 
For more information please see: www.engc.org.uk/internationalThe Engineering Council reviews its guidance periodically and 
welcomes comments about this. Licensees may use this to 
assist them in developing guidance for their members. 
For the latest information please see the Engineering Council 
website: www.engc.org.uk\n\n--- PAGE 49 ---\n49
Glossary
AAQA Approval and Accreditation of 
Qualifications and Apprenticeships . One 
of the Standards which the Engineering 
Council  publishes, along with AHEP , 
ICTTech  Standard , RfR and UK-SPEC . 
AQAA sets out the standards and learning 
outcomes which must be met for qualifications 
and apprenticeships to be approved  for 
registration  at all levels, ie EngTech  or 
ICTTech , IEng  and CEng . Previously known 
as AQAH (Approval of Qualifications and 
Apprenticeships Handbook).  
See: www.engc.org.uk/aaqa
Accredited /
AccreditationA process of peer review of a programme 
in a specified location against published 
learning outcomes and/or competences , 
including a review of delivery, assessment and 
facilities. This usually applies to programmes 
that are not assured externally. This usually 
involves a visit from a team of professional 
engineers nominated by Licensees . See also: 
Approved / Approval .AHEP Accreditation of Higher Education 
Programmes . One of the Standards which 
the Engineering Council  publishes, along 
with AAQA , the ICTTech  Standard , RfR and 
UK-SPEC . Working in line  with  
UK-SPEC , AHEP sets out the standards 
for the accreditation  of higher education 
programmes in engineering. It also outlines 
the application process for universities that 
wish to secure or maintain accreditation of 
their programmes. Accreditation is carried 
out by  Licensees  in accordance with these 
requirements. See: www.engc.org.uk/ahep
AIET The Agreement for International 
Engineering Technicians  is an agreement 
which works to ensure that professionally 
registered Engineering Technicians’ 
competence  is recognised internationally. 
See International Activity on page 48  or 
www.ieagreements.org/aiet   
Approved /
ApprovalThe process of peer reviewing a programme 
against published learning outcomes. This 
involves a review of a qualification or an 
apprenticeship programme by a number of 
professionally registered engineers. See 
also: Accredited / Accreditation
AQAH See AAQA . \n\n--- PAGE 50 ---\n50
CDM 
Regulations Construction (Design and Management) 
Regulations 2015 , known as CDM 
Regulations or CDM 2015, are UK regulations 
governing construction projects of any 
type and size. CDM Regulations define 
responsibilities and place legal duties, 
enforceable by criminal law, on all parties 
involved in a construction project.
Chartered 
Engineer 
(CEng)One of the professional titles available to 
individuals who meet the required standards 
of competence and commitment . See page 
31 or www.engc.org.uk/ceng
Code of 
Professional 
Conduct Every Licensee  and Professional Affiliate 
which is licensed by the Engineering Council  
will have its own Code of Professional 
Conduct. One of the requirements of 
professional registration  is demonstrating 
compliance with the appropriate organisation’s 
Code. See page 47 .
Commitment A set of values, rules of conduct, and 
obligations that maintain and enhance the 
reputation of the engineering profession 
and the individual. Demonstrating both 
competence  and commitment is part of 
the requirement to become professionally 
registered  with the Engineering Council .Competence The ability to carry out appropriate tasks to 
an effective standard. Achieving competence 
requires the right level of underpinning 
knowledge, understanding and skill, as well 
as a professional attitude. Demonstrating 
both competence and commitment  is part of 
the requirement to become professionally 
registered  with the  Engineering Council . 
CPD Continuing Professional Development.  The 
systematic acquisition of knowledge and skills, 
and the development of personal qualities, 
to maintain and enhance professional 
competence  for current and future roles. All 
members of Licensees  have an obligation to 
carry out CPD and to support the learning of 
others. See: www.engc.org.uk/cpd
Credit and 
Qualifications 
Framework for 
WalesThe Credit and Qualifications Framework 
for Wales covers learning from the very 
initial stages (Entry 1, 2 and 3) to the most 
advanced (Level 8). It is managed by a 
strategic operational partnership comprising 
the Welsh Government, Higher Education 
Funding Council for Wales (HEFCW) and 
Qualifications Wales.
Documented 
EvidenceThe written and documented evidence 
of experience and qualifications which is 
submitted for a Professional Review  when 
applying for professional registration.\n\n--- PAGE 51 ---\n51
Dublin Accord 
(DA)An international agreement among the bodies 
responsible for recognising programmes and 
qualifications for Engineering Technicians . 
It establishes a benchmark for Engineering 
Technician education across those bodies, 
and recognises the equivalence of accredited  
or approved  Engineering Technician 
programmes. See International Activity on 
page 48  or www.ieagreements.org/dublin
Engineering 
CouncilThe UK regulatory body for the engineering 
profession. The Engineering Council sets and 
maintains internationally recognised standards 
of professional competence and ethics 
and holds the UK register of professional 
engineers and technicians. 
Engineering 
Technician 
(EngTech)One of the professional titles available to 
individuals who meet the required standards 
of competence  and commitment . See page 
19 or www.engc.org.uk/engtech
EQFM The European Quality Foundation Model  
for continuous improvement.
EUR-ACE® A European quality label for recognising 
accredited  engineering degree programmes 
at Bachelors and Masters level. The 
Engineering Council  is authorised to award 
the EUR-ACE® label. See: 
www.enaee.eu/eur-ace-systemFEANI The European Federation of National 
Engineering Associations . The  Engineering 
Council  is the UK member of FEANI. See: 
www.feani.org
HASAW Health and Safety at Work . Specifically, 
the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act, the 
primary legislation covering occupational 
health and safety in the UK.
HNC Higher National Certificate . 
HND  Higher National Diploma .
ICTTech Information and Communications Technology 
Technician. One of the professional titles 
available to individuals who meet the required 
standards of competence  and commitment . 
See: www.engc.org.uk/icttech
IEA International Engineering Alliance . A 
partnership of international organisations 
across seven agreements that aim to facilitate 
the recognition of engineering educational 
qualifications and professional competence . 
See International Activity on page 48  or  
www.ieagreements.org  
IETA The International Engineering 
Technologists Agreement  is an agreement 
which works to ensure that professionally 
registered engineering technologists’ 
competence  is recognised internationally.  
See International Activity on page 48  or  
www.ieagreements.org/ieta\n\n--- PAGE 52 ---\n52
Incorporated 
Engineer (IEng)One of the professional titles available to 
individuals who meet the required standards 
of competence  and commitment . See page 
24 or www.engc.org.uk/ieng
Individual 
AssessmentThe route to professional registration  for 
individuals without recognised qualifications. 
See page 16 . The other way to achieve 
professional registration is through 
Recognised Qualifications . 
International 
Professional 
Engineers 
Agreement The International Professional Engineers 
Agreement is an international agreement 
for the purposes of recognising substantial 
equivalence of professional competence  
in engineering. See International Activity on 
page 48  or www.ieagreements.org/ipea
ISO The International Organization for 
Standardization . ISO publishes documents 
such as ISO 45001 the international standard 
for occupational health and safety and ISO 
9000, the international quality standards on 
quality management and quality assurance.Licensee An engineering membership organisation 
which is licensed by the Engineering Council  
to assess applicants for  professional 
registration . Some Licensees are also 
licensed to approve or accredit programmes 
of learning. Licensees are sometimes known 
informally as Professional Engineering 
Institutions or PEIs. For a full and current list 
of Licensees see: www.engc.org.uk/licensees
May In the context of the requirements set out 
in the Standards, ‘may’ indicates there is 
permission to do something.
National 
Engineering 
BodiesNational engineering bodies responsible 
for regulation of the profession, such as 
the Engineering Council , or the national 
academy such as the Royal Academy of 
Engineering .
NVQ National Vocational Qualification . NVQs 
are qualifications developed and accredited  
according to criteria set out nationally, and 
that are achieved through assessment and 
training. In Scotland, they are known as 
Scottish Vocational Qualification ( SVQ ). 
To achieve an NVQ, applicants must prove 
they have the ability to carry out their job 
to the required standard. NVQs are based 
on National Occupational Standards that 
describe the ‘competencies’ expected in any 
given job role. \n\n--- PAGE 53 ---\n53
PEI 
(Professional 
Engineering 
Institution)See Licensee .
Post-nominal Letters placed after a person’s name which 
indicate that the person holds a certain 
position, academic degree, professional 
accreditation , office or honour. Examples of 
engineering post-nominals include ICTTech , 
EngTech , IEng  or CEng . 
Professional 
AffiliateAn incorporated body or engineering 
institution which is closely associated with, but 
not licensed by, the Engineering Council . It 
may enter into an agreement with a Licensee 
to process its members for professional 
registration . For a full and current list of 
Professional Affiliates see:  
www.engc.org.uk/affiliates
Professional 
developmentThe process by which an individual gains 
professional competence . It may take place 
through formal and informal learning, and 
workplace training and experience. Professional 
registrationThe process in which an individual is admitted 
to the Engineering Council ’s Register as 
an Engineering Technician  (EngTech), 
Incorporated Engineer (IEng),  Chartered 
Engineer  (CEng) or an Information and 
Communications Technology Technician 
(ICTTech ). To achieve professional 
registration  the individual must demonstrate, 
via a peer review process by a Licensee , that 
they have met the profession’s Standards of 
commitment  and competence . Individuals 
who have been awarded a professional 
registration title may use the relevant  
post-nominal .
Professional 
ReviewA peer assessment process to decide whether 
an individual has met the requirements for 
registration . Professional Review is a holistic 
assessment of the applicant’s competence  
and commitment  against the relevant 
sections of UK-SPEC . See page 16 –17. \n\n--- PAGE 54 ---\n54
Professional 
Review 
InterviewA peer assessment process to assess 
whether an individual has met the 
requirements for professional registration . 
It is a holistic assessment of the applicant’s 
competence  and commitment against 
the relevant sections of UK-SPEC . The 
Professional Review Interview is conducted 
by suitably qualified registrants , who make 
a recommendation whether the applicant has 
demonstrated the necessary competencies to 
achieve professional registration. See page 
17. 
Recognised 
QualificationsQualifications that are recognised as 
delivering the appropriate learning outcomes 
to develop an individual’s underpinning 
knowledge and understanding  for 
professional registration .
Registrant An individual who holds a professional 
registration  title such as ICTTech , EngTech , 
IEng  or CEng . 
Registration See Professional Registration .
RfR Regulations for Registration . One of the 
Standards which the  Engineering Council  
publishes, along with AAQA , AHEP , ICTTech 
Standard  and UK-SPEC . RfR sets out the 
rules, for Licensees , on the process of 
awarding professional registration  titles 
such as  ICTTech , EngTech , IEng  or CEng .  Royal Academy 
of Engineering 
(RAEng)The UK’s national academy for engineering 
that works to advance and promote 
excellence in engineering. RAEng provides 
analysis and policy support relating to 
business and education, invests in the UK’s 
research base to underpin innovation, and 
works to improve public awareness and 
understanding of engineering. See:  
www.raeng.org.uk
Royal Charter A formal document issued by the monarch 
granting rights and powers to an individual or 
an organisation. 
SCQF The Scottish Credit and Qualifications 
Framework . For more information see:  
www.scqf.org.uk
Shall In the context of the requirements set out 
in the Standards, ‘shall’ indicates there 
is a requirement to do something (ie it is 
mandatory). 
Should  In the context of the requirements set 
out in the Standards, ‘should’ indicates a 
recommendation to do something. 
Statement 
of Ethical 
PrinciplesPublished by the Engineering Council  
and the Royal Academy of Engineering. 
Engineering  professionals should  read the 
Statement of Ethical Principles in conjunction 
with their relevant Code of Professional 
Conduct . See page 47  or  
www.engc.org.uk/ethics   \n\n--- PAGE 55 ---\n55
SVQ Scottish Vocational Qualification. See also 
NVQ .
Sydney Accord 
(SA)An international agreement among the bodies 
responsible for accrediting  engineering 
technologist degree ( IEng ) programmes. It 
establishes a benchmark for engineering 
technologist education across those bodies, 
and recognises the equivalence of accredited  
engineering technologist programmes. See 
International Activity on page 48  or  
www.ieagreements.org/sydney
UK-SPEC UK Standard for Professional Engineering 
Competence and Commitment . This 
document, which sets out the competence  
and commitment  requirements for 
registration  as an EngTech , IEng  or CEng . 
UK-SPEC is one of the Standards which the 
Engineering Council  publishes, along with 
AAQA , AHEP , the ICTTech  Standard  and 
RfR. 
Underpinning 
Knowledge and 
UnderstandingThe knowledge and understanding of the 
principles of science, mathematics and 
engineering theory that are required to form 
the basis of engineering competence  at a 
professional level.Washington 
Accord (WA)An international agreement among the bodies 
responsible for accrediting  engineering 
degree ( CEng ) programmes. It establishes 
and benchmarks the standard for professional 
engineering education across those 
bodies, and recognises the equivalence of 
accredited  engineering progrogrammes.' See 
International Activity on page 48  or  
www.ieagreements.org/washington\n\n--- PAGE 56 ---\nT +44 (0)20 3206 0500
F +44 (0)20 3206 0501 
info@engc.org.uk 
www.engc.org.uk
Registered Charity: 286142 
© Engineering Council 2020 (edition 4.1 with updated hierarchy diagram September 2022). First published 2003. Reviewed 2008 and 2013. 
Please refer to the Engineering Council website, www.engc.org.uk  for the most up-to-date version.
The Engineering Council encourages publication of extracts from this Standard, subject to attribution to the Engineering Council.\n